Instructions for running a Smart Rollup node in operator mode (#160)
etherlinkcom/docs: docs/network/smart-rollup-nodes.md

These commitments validate Etherlink's state and ensure that Etherlink is processing blocks and transactions honestly according to its kernel.
As described in [Smart Rollups](https://docs.tezos.com/architecture/smart-rollups) on docs.tezos.com, one honest node is enough to ensure that Etherlink is running correctly, but adding more nodes strengthens its security and allows users to verify for themselves that Etherlink is running as intended.

Running the node in this mode requires these prerequisites:

- A Tezos layer 1 node running in archive mode.

   To bootstrap a Smart Rollup node from a snapshot, you need a node that has the full history from the time the snapshot was taken to the current level.
   Usually this means connecting to an archive node, but if the snapshot is recent, it can work with a rolling node that keeps enough history.
   After the node has started, you can switch to a rolling node.

   :::warning Using public nodes

   You can bootstrap the Smart Rollup node by connecting it to a public layer 1 node, but after the Smart Rollup node bootstraps, you must connect it to a layer 1 node that you control.

>    Using a public layer 1 node as the basis for a Smart Rollup node in operator mode exposes the Smart Rollup node to problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Using a public layer 1 node as the basis for a Smart Rollup node in operator mode exposes the Smart Rollup node to security risks.
```

>    For example, a malicious layer 1 node can expose the Smart Rollup to an incorrect brach, which can cause the Smart Rollup node to post invalid commitments and lose tez when correct commitments refute them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, a malicious layer 1 node can expose the Smart Rollup to an incorrect branch, which can cause the Smart Rollup node to post invalid commitments and lose tez when other operators computing from the correct branch refute them.
```

- [Running the Smart Rollup node in observer mode](#running-the-smart-rollup-node-in-observer-mode)

## Running the Smart Rollup node in operator mode

Running the Smart Rollup node in operator mode is the best way to participate in Etherlink because in this mode the node posts commitments about Etherlink's state to layer 1.
These commitments validate Etherlink's state and ensure that Etherlink is processing blocks and transactions honestly according to its kernel.
As described in [Smart Rollups](https://docs.tezos.com/architecture/smart-rollups) on docs.tezos.com, one honest node is enough to ensure that Etherlink is running correctly, but adding more nodes strengthens its security and allows users to verify for themselves that Etherlink is running as intended.

Running the node in this mode requires these prerequisites:

- A Tezos layer 1 node running in archive mode.
The Smart Rollup node needs the full history from the time the snapshot was taken to the current level, which usually means connecting to an archive node, but sometimes it can work with a rolling node that keeps enough history.
After the node has started, you can switch to a rolling node.

> You can use a public archive node for this purpose, but for better performance, switch to your own node after the Smart Rollup node has started.

Reviewer: As mentioned on Slack, I think we need to be more strict here.

Running a SR node in operator mode should _never_ be done against a public endpoint that you don’t own. It’s not even related to performances, it’s for security purposes.

A malicious public node can potentially expose you a malicious branch, and make you compute invalid commitments.

Reviewer: I really think we should explicitly say “no public endpoint when running in operator mode” because it can be harmful otherwise, and if it means having to work on the PR a bit longer, I think it’s worth it.

Maybe it’s being too defensive here, but it’s for the security of operators’ assets.

Author: Got it, I've added a stronger warning.

For more information about Smart Rollup nodes in general, see [Smart Rollups](https://docs.tezos.com/architecture/smart-rollups) on docs.tezos.com and [Smart Rollup Node](https://tezos.gitlab.io/shell/smart_rollup_node.html) in the Octez documentation.

You can run the Etherlink Smart Rollup in many modes, but these instructions cover only the most common modes:

- [Running the Smart Rollup node in operator mode](#running-the-smart-rollup-node-in-operator-mode)
- [Running the Smart Rollup node in observer mode](#running-the-smart-rollup-node-in-observer-mode)

In either case, you can start the Smart Rollup node with a snapshot of the Etherlink state to prevent it from having to compute the state from Etherlink genesis.
You can also skip the snapshot and run the node from Etherlink genesis, but it can take a long time for the node to catch up.
These instructions cover both ways of running the Smart Rollup node.

## Running the Smart Rollup node in operator mode

Running the Smart Rollup node in operator mode is the best way to participate in Etherlink because in this mode the node posts commitments about Etherlink's state to layer 1.

> However, running the node in this mode requires an account with at least 10,000 staked tez and certain other prerequisites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, running the node in this mode requires an account with at least 10,000 liquid tez and certain other prerequisites.
```

If it’s staked, it cannot become a bond for a rollup.

To run an Etherlink Smart Rollup node in operator mode, you need:

- A Tezos layer 1 node running in archive mode or full mode with expanded node history, such as with the argument `--history-mode full:50`
- An account with at least 10,000 tez staked, referred to as the _operator account_

> - A separate account to sign batching operations, referred to as the _batcher account_; this account is necessary only if you also run an Etherlink EVM node

Reviewer: This is actually not true. Only the sequencer needs a batcher key.

Maybe we can start pushing for the “maintenance” mode for operators.

Author: Removed mention of batcher key.

> - A clean data directory that has not been used for another Smart Rollup node or a node running in a different mode

Reviewer: You should be able to move from one node to another.

Author: You can force it to mode from one mode to another but I get a scary-looking warning about using the `--force` option, so I think we should suggest a clean data directory unless there's a reason why people would want to use an already-populated directory.

Reviewer: I haven’t tried to do that for a while, let’s stick to your version for now and relax later if the UX improves

1. Get a built version of the Smart Rollup node binary, named `octez-smart-rollup-node`.
The best place to get the most recent binary files to use with Etherlink is https://gitlab.com/tezos/tezos/-/releases.

1. Initialize the local context of the node, which is where it stores local data:

   1. Set the environment variable `SR_DATA_DIR` to the directory where the node should store its local data.
   The default value is `$HOME/.tezos-smart-rollup-node`.

   1. Initialize the local context by running this command and using the address of the Etherlink Smart Rollup, which you can get from the [Network information](/get-started/network-information) page, and the addresses or Octez client aliases for the operator account and the batcher account:

      ```bash
      octez-smart-rollup-node init operator config for sr1Ghq66tYK9y3r8CC1Tf8i8m5nxh8nTvZEf \
        with operators \

>         operating:$OPERATOR_ACCOUNT \
>         cementing:$OPERATOR_ACCOUNT \
>         batching:$BATCHER_ACCOUNT \
>         executing_outbox:$OPERATOR_ACCOUNT \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        $OPERATOR_ACCOUNT \
```

Need to check but IIRC this works.

Reviewer: Current version seems necessary for Octez v20. Can’t wait for V21 to be the stable release.

      ```json
      { "smart-rollup-address": "sr1Ghq66tYK9y3r8CC1Tf8i8m5nxh8nTvZEf",
        "smart-rollup-node-operator":
          { "operating": "tz1QCVQinE8iVj1H2fckqx6oiM85CNJSK9Sx",
            "batching": [ "tz1hQKqRPHmxET8du3fNACGyCG8kZRsXm2zD" ],
            "cementing": "tz1QCVQinE8iVj1H2fckqx6oiM85CNJSK9Sx",
            "executing_outbox": "tz1QCVQinE8iVj1H2fckqx6oiM85CNJSK9Sx" },
        "fee-parameters": {}, "mode": "operator",
        "pre-images-endpoint":
          "https://snapshots.eu.tzinit.org/etherlink-ghostnet/wasm_2_0_0" }
      ```

      This configuration uses the preimages that the Tezos Foundation hosts on a file server on a so-called "preimages endpoint".
      It's safe to use these preimages because the node verifies them.
      If you don't want to use third-party preimages, you can build the kernel yourself and move the contents of the `wasm_2_0_0/` directory to the local data directory; see [Building the Etherlink kernel](/network/building-kernel).
      However, in this case, you must manually update this directory with the preimages of every kernel voted by the community and deployed on Etherlink after that.

> 1. (Optional) To speed up the setup process by loading a snapshot, follow these steps:

Reviewer: Optional maybe, but _highly recommended_.

Author: Made snapshot less optional.
